retailers are sort of like building on
this momentum and this idea that they
get push this, you know, lack of
consumer knowledge of what the market
really is. And that's something we can't
play in the food service side of the
business. We're up like a rocket, down
like a rock because our our
>> uh chefs um and and some of the buying
teams that they have are much more
knowledgeable about markets than than
the average consumer is.
>> Interesting. So, if they see high tomato
prices in the headlines, they're not
they're not going to be fooled thinking
that like, oh, it's going to go up even
further from here. They're like, all
right, the spike's done. Why are you
still charging me this amount?
>> They're going to log on to the USDA
website and look at prices. They're
going to be talking with some of our
farmers and growers about fuel
projections as well with some of them.
And so, um, yeah, it's a much more savvy
buyer than maybe the traditional, you
know, American retail consumer. It's
interesting to think that, you know, one
of the promises of the internet was
like, oh, the customer is going to be
able to like be so well informed, right?
And they're going to know like they're
going to be able to find the best price.
And there probably is that to some
extent, right? That there probably are
customers who are like extremely
wellinformed and can find the best
price. But the part that they didn't
talk about was that the retailer would
be very well informed about the customer
and [clears throat] that they would be
just as savvy and have all kinds of
counter tactics to counter the
customer's ability to learn about the
price,
>> right? And not to get all antitrust, but
if the customer has limited options for
buying tomatoes, it's not like you can
go into a supermarket armed with your
knowledge of the USDA website and start
negotiating.
>> Although that would be fun.
>> I I can't say I haven't tried that
before. Doesn't work.
Interesting. All right. [laughter]
>> I do complain to uh the the head produce
clerk at our store every once in a while
about the price.
>> I know the real [laughter] price of
this. Like come on guys.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode
[music] of the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm
Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Wisenthal.
>> Joe, I know you love tomatoes.
>> I love tomatoes. Oh my god, I love
tomatoes. I love tomatoes so much. This
is the episode just Joe talking about
how he loves tomatoes.
>> Well, there's a funny one because like
this is a you episode you know you like
book you're like oh let's do a tomato
episode
>> which I'm glad you did cuz I love
tomatoes I'm going to make my but it's
not like but I don't know anything about
tomatoes. I just love eating them
>> and I'm going to like when I was a kid
like growing up in like exurban Illinois
you know I had terrible tomatoes growing
up so I hated tomatoes
>> from the supermarket from the grocery
store. So I thought tomatoes were like
the worst vegetable on the planet. Well,
they're not. Well,
um,
>> are you going to correct yourself and
say they're not a vegetable?
>> They're a fruit, you know. So, I'm just
going to go on because I'm going to take
this episode over. Um, but like, you
know, I've once heard someone say that
like knowledge is knowing that tomato is
a vegetable and wisdom is knowing not to
put tomato in a fruit salad.
>> But I've like come to like like tomatoes
are so delicious. There are some
varietals that I absolutely would put in
a fruit salad. No, I would.
>> No, this is wrong.
>> And so these tomatoes that we No, no,
no. Like when you have you tried one of
the tomatoes?
>> I have. I still would not put it in a
fruit sal.
>> I absolutely would. I love tomatoes.
Anyway, sorry.
>> Um okay, so we got to talk about
tomatoes. [laughter]
Perhaps not in the way you have been so
far, but um
>> we'll spend one minute talking about how
tomato prices are really high and then
the other 45 minutes we're going to talk
about how delicious tomatoes are.
>> That's right. Okay. So, the genesis of
this entire episode is that as you will
have heard, tomato prices are really
high right now. So, I think we're
looking at something like a 40% increase
yearoveryear.
I just saw some new data that's out this
morning. So, there are a lot a lot of
tomato headlines floating around saying
that tomato prices are at a record $2.69
a pound. So, tomatoes are getting kind
of expensive, which is bad news for you.
>> It's really bad news for me because
because I'm addicted to them and I am
price insensitive. So, it doesn't matter
how high the price of tomatoes get, it
will not affect my volume at all. So
that's just straight like I that's just
straight money out of my pocket.
>> It is not bad news for me cuz I just
installed five raised beds, big raised
beds dedicated all to tomatoes and I
just planted them out yesterday and I'm
very excited. You should be excited too
because you know you'll get some.
>> Tracy always brings me tomatoes at some
point in the summer and they're always
delicious.
>> I've got a really big selection this
year. Cherokee
>> nice
>> brandy wine. All the classics and some
new things. Fourth of July I've never
tried before. I I don't mean to get all
like bubba gump and just start listing
[laughter] tomato varieties here. Um,
but tomatoes are on my mind and I think
they're on a lot of other people's minds
just by nature of the price increase.
So, we should figure out what's actually
going on here.
>> I cannot wait to just talk tomatoes for
the next hour.
>> You're not just going to say how good
they are over and over, right? I might.
>> Okay. Well, I am very happy to say that
we do in fact have the perfect guest.
We're going to be speaking with Jacob
Kremple. He is the SVP of procurement
and merchandising over at Baldor
Specialty. So, thank you so much for
coming on all thoughts.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Very excited to be
here. I have uh quite a few friends that
are flabbergasted that I get to be on
Odd Lots of all things. So, [laughter]
this is I'm excited to talk tomatoes.
>> This is the perfect guest for the
perfect moment. Can you tell us what
Baldor actually does?
>> So, Baldor is a 30-year-old food service
distribution company uh based um up in
the Hunts Point Market area of Bronx uh
here in New York City. Uh we distribute
food from Maine to Northern Virginia. Um
send out about 500 trucks a day uh with
food mostly to uh food service
restaurants, right? So about 70%
restaurants, 30% um independent retail
or other wholesalers. Uh
>> we got our start actually uh you know
Buchi's in Greenwich Village. Sure. Um
so Andy Buchcci and Joe Dorya. Joe Dorya
was their uh produce sourcing guy and he
was always out there looking for the
best and most unique varieties that he
could possibly find. Uh and so suddenly
they they saw a lot of chefs that they
knew in the area shopping at their store
had a great idea of starting a wholesale
distribution company. So they took
Buchcci and Doria combined them
together. That's actually how you get
Bowdor. Um which is which is a fun
story. So um that was in the 70s ' 80s.
Uh that that business grew, expanded,
started to blow up. Uh they spun it off
as a separate company in '91. Uh when um
Andy Baldouchi's uh son-in-law Kevin
Murphy took over the business. He ran it
until about 2013 when he passed away
from cancer and his son TJ is our owner
now and CEO and he's uh been running the
company since then.
>> Within the realm of food distribution,
if someone asked me to like name all the
food distributors, I would be able to
name Cisco. We've done at least one
episode on them. I might be able to name
if I United Natural Foods and then I
would uh be able to name Beldor. Um uh
and the but and with Beldor would be the
only one that I would associate in my
mind maybe because you've done a good
job with branding etc. is like okay
these are highquality ingredients rather
than uh just um uh food distribution who
is like who is who are your clients who
do you sell into at Beldor? Yeah, we
sell just about anybody, right? But I
think we've we've made our bread and
butter as this um
>> I I know I listened to your Cisco uh
episode, right? And broadlininers that
you were talking about on that that that
uh podcast.
>> We view ourselves as a highlininer. Um
so we're going to carry a wide
assortment. We carry everything from uh
meat and dairy to to produce, which is
what we had our start in, and that's our
our wheelhouse for sure. Um uh but we
have experts in all of those areas and
and our job is to build a curated
assortment um of maybe 7,500 SKs versus
a Cisco carrying 20,000 plus, right? So
so the merchants on my team, they just
have this insatiable appetite to go out
and find the best produce, the best meat
um that they possibly can to fit
whatever that customer's need is.
Whether it is something that's more
commodity based like a basic Roma to uh
high specialty variety tomatoes,
tomatoes like some of the ones that I
brought today. And what's the mix in
terms of restaurants versus grocery
stores or restaurants versus whatever
else?
>> Yeah, so we're about 70% uh maybe a
little bit more in restaurants. Um and
there we service everything from the
Michelin Star um
>> uh partners that we have that we have a
lot of long existing relationships with
some of the top chefs in in the areas
that we serve to um your local bodeas or
bagel shops as well.
>> So how does the relationship with
supermarkets or restaurants typically
work? Would it be I'm a restaurant and I
don't know, I want to do a capray salad
and so I need some really good tomatoes.
Do I call you up and I ask you
specifically to to source tomatoes for
the salad or do you have like a catalog
that I start flipping through or
>> Yeah. So, um you go to boworfood.com,
right? And you go on to our website and
from there you can see our full
assortment. Uh, and then once you sign
up as a customer, then you're able to
see uh pricing and availability and some
of those things to make the decisions of
what you possibly want to buy. We also
have our sales reps that that are
partnering with a specific set amount of
accounts that um bring that white glove
service, right? We want to make sure
that you have somebody that you can call
and pick up the phone and say, "Hey, I
want to do a capray salad. What do you
think?"
>> Tomatoes.
>> Yeah. Or Yes. Exactly. We get mostly
those calls, but also some of the
innovation calls as well of like, I'm
looking to do a capray. What would you
suggest? Right. Um, and so between that
that hight touch white glove service
that our our sales teams provides as
well as our merchandising expertise and
storytelling on the website that that we
love to do. Um, we're really able to
maybe bring that picture full circle a
little bit better than maybe um some
others out there to really allow you to
tell that story on your menu. So, I
don't really know that much about the
restaurant industry, but you know, I I
read Kitchen Confidential and there in
that book, Anthony Berdane talks a lot
about like, you know, he'll play off the
suppliers. He's like, "Oh, this guy
could get me this fish at this price.
What can you do?" But this in a time,
but this is strikes me as very relevant
in a time of high price volatility,
which we've particularly seen over the
last several years. Talk about the
duration of contracts and how long they
can last. I I've never seem to be able
to get clear answers on this. Can a
restaurant say lock in a price for six
months? Is it week by week? How like
what are these relationships and how
stable are they?
>> Yeah, that's a trade secret, Joe. No,
I'm kidding. I No, I think we we want to
offer that. We want to meet the chef
where they are, right? And so we offer a
a wide variety of opportunities of how
they might want to price with us, right?
anything from daily pricing to weekly
pricing to depending on the size of of
the restaurant chain, we will offer
longerterm contracts as well. Um, but I
do think there is some push and play
left in this industry of, you know, a
chef wants to be able to price shop a
little bit, right? Okay. Um, and so, uh,
a lot of our customers, you know, our
our view is that we provide that value
not just in making sure that you have a
good value on the price, but that our
service is, uh, way above par, right?
We're going to deliver on time. Our cuto
offs are the latest that you can get
from any distributor. Um, so if you're a
chef in New York City at 11 o'clock at
night, you can go on our website and
still order product where most other
competitors
>> And what time would he get there? The
next morning if they
>> um, depending on their account and their
delivery time, as early as 6:00 a.m.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah.
>> Wow. So, are you seeing a lot of
customers at the moment trying to lock
in tomato prices given where they they
seem to have, you know, gone to
recently? This tomato pricing thing is
unique as far as like how expensive it
got, but I'd say in general in produce,
this is like a very much a a normal
working environment for my team of just
prices spiking and going crazy here and
there. And I think a lot of that is um
>> produce demand, especially in the US, is
rather inelastic in the short term.
>> Um, and it's so reliant on weather and
acreage grown and the production out of
that acreage. um that you see very wild
swings in markets all the time, right?
Like tomatoes was the last thing to pop.
Yeah. I guarantee this summer you're
gonna be hearing about Roma again. Um
because that's already almost $100 a
case right now.
>> Uh which is insane for Roma because of
bad weather in California. Uh and
avocados as well. Avocados went from $30
a case to $80 a case in literally the
span of a week
>> um in the last week. So
>> Joe, did I ever tell you? For some
reason, I'm on the has avocado board
email distribution list and they send
out really good updates about what's
going on in the avocado market. I think
it's cuz I was writing about Bitcoin
prices and avocado correlation and like
somehow I got automatically signed up
for this thing. [laughter]
>> Um, okay. So, let's talk about this
prices of tomatoes. There was actually a
Bloomberg piece just yesterday. Prices
uh up 40% from a year ago. Let's talk
about let's decompose the price of a
tomato. So I pay I buy a tomato and it's
40% more like you know how much of that
is transport how much of that is
fertilizer how much of that is land etc.
Like what are the what goes into the
price of a tomato and what is the main
driver of swing year-over-year?
>> Yeah. So let's let's maybe break this
down a couple different ways. You have
your your retail price point that a
customer sees. Let's save that for a
second. Let's talk about the wholesale
>> price of like what what a going price of
a tomato should be if you're going to go
directly to a farmer and buy half a
truck of tomatoes, right?
>> Um for that piece, there's all the the
costs they have to grow, right? So
you're talking fertilizer, seed, labor,
uh water, um the production costs around
their facility, the energy, and the
trucking, right? Um those are the the
base things that go into growing a
tomato, right? Um so they have a base
cost that they have to hit every year to
just break even. Yeah.
>> Right. Um [clears throat] the way that
market works is then usually typically
they're going to contract a certain
portion of it to try to make sure they
get a guaranteed return to make some
profit and then they're going to uh call
that 60 70%. The rest are going to try
to play on the open market which means
whatever the USDA prices going rate for
what a wholesale tomato should be that's
what we're going to sell the rest of the
30% at. Right.
>> Okay. um uh to try to catch some of
these upswings and and actually make
some profit, right? Like a lot of these
growers that that we deal with, this is
a razor thin margin business just like
ours is as well. Um and and grocery is
as well, right? Like your your food cost
is such a huge part of
>> uh the the cost for um whether it's a
grower, a retailer, a food service,
distribution company, you're you're
playing in margins of single digits,
right? What happened specifically this
time was uh if you look at winter
growing of tomatoes uh you can't grow a
tomato in New Jersey in the winter. You
can't grow it in Illinois in in the
winter, right? You're going to be
growing tomatoes in Florida.
>> We'll get to the greenhouse conversation
a little bit, but yeah. Okay.
>> Right. But your traditional field
tomatoes are going to be grown in
Florida and in Mexico and you think of
okay for December until the spring
starts, right? So call around this time
when some of the more local programs
start going further south. Uh if you
needed a 100 tomatoes for the US market,
30 of them are going to come from
Florida, 70 of them are going to come
from Mexico. So about 70% of our tomato
production in the winter is done in
Mexico now.
>> Um 30% in in the US. If you go back
pre-NAFTA, right around when NAFTA
started, that was completely reversed.
It was about 80% domestic,
>> 20% Mexico, which we can also dive into,
which is a fascinating
>> story. The globalization of produce and
we talk about flavor and and and
quality. It's it's it's a very
interesting story as well. So, there are
two freezes that happened in Florida
this winter that took uh 80% of the crop
in Florida out completely. Blooms fell
off,
>> vines uh died.
>> Was not a great situation, right? Over
$150 million worth of tomatoes lost.
>> Again, produce demand is rather
inelastic. So, you took a market that
needed 100 tomatoes and you took 26 out
of the equation. um and you're left
with, you know, the the 74 tomatoes that
are left for 100, right? And anytime
that happens, that's where you see these
spikes. Uh so it was less about the
input costs themselves. Got it.
>> At this point, I would say uh majority
of it was weather related. Now, the
other thing is they're always going to
grow a little bit more than what we need
for the market or their best guess, but
it's a very segmented industry, so
nobody knows exactly how much acreage
everybody's putting in. The USDA does
some projections, but in general, we did
see Mexico decline their production a
little bit this year, probably 3 to 4%.
>> Doesn't sound like a lot, but when
they're supplying 70% of the US market
in the winter, that was actually quite a
bit. While that was because of the
anti-dumping tariff that was put in
place of 17% and change, um, that was it
was implemented back in July of last
year. So, it's a long history between uh
Florida growers and Mexico growers uh
about the price of tomatoes and what a
fair cost to grow actually is. Um and
and a lot of accusations of dumping by
Mexican growers into the US.
>> Um so, again, you think of, you know,
NAFTA in the mid '9s and the start of of
more free trade. That's when um Mexico,
you think of Sinaloa, Sonora, Halisco.
Those are amazing growing regions with a
ton of land that they had available that
had a lot less chance of a freeze like
Florida does.
>> Right.
>> Right. And so once that they were
already growing tomatoes for the US
market, we're about 20% then, but they
they started to really invest in uh
growing much more down there for the US
market once trade became a lot more
predictable. Uh when that happened, uh
they also started getting into shade
house or greenhouse, right? So there's
shade house is basically like netting
that you would put over a massive tomato
field. You think of these like vines of
tomatoes uh just you know acres of
fields that are covered by netting. Um
and that sort of helps protect from the
sun but also from bugs uh as well. Um
and you see that with a shade house in
Mexico you get almost 3 to 4x the return
>> per acre on the amount of tomatoes that
you can produce versus if you just left
it out in the sun. Um, so they they
evolved into shade house and then you
got into greenhouse which was like
perfect growing conditions. They they
took the technology they were using in
Canada in the Lemington area to do all
the snacking tomatoes and things that
were starting to grow and be a bigger
thing. Uh took that that down south into
Mexico, started building these big green
houses so they could get year round
production down there as well. Um and
between those two they're producing a
significant amount more per acre than
maybe a traditional fieldgrown tomato
would be. Right. By the way, we'll get
into this later, but if you just look at
my laptop right now, I had literally
looked up Lamington, Ontario right now
because I knew this would come up.
[laughter] We'll get into that later.
But yeah, I have I have questions about
the uh the Lamington market there. Yeah.
>> In the 90s and into the 2000s, there
were accusations by Florida growers of
dumping by Mexico growers.
>> Um there was the Mexico defense was our
cost of produce is lower. We have lower
labor costs. Uh we're getting better
yields. Um uh so this isn't actually
something that like we're economically
selling lower in our home country versus
you are not. I think there's there's
truth on both sides to that for sure. Um
but we had these suspension agreements
in place that had floors on tomato
pricing that was allowed to be charged
um in the US from Mexico growers. That
changed uh last year in July when they
um the US government reopened the case
and put the anti-dumping tariff on
Mexico. And that change created more
uncertainty than maybe the floor would
have um under the old suspension
agreements that were in place. Uh so
between those two things, I think it was
a little bit of a perfect storm of you
decimated the Florida crop. Mexico
didn't have a ton of extra production
left available. And you see this crazy
spike where a case of tomatoes on
average went from
in April much closer to the 5-year
average to May was 65 bucks a case on
average for the whole month. um and and
very high.
>> Do you expect prices to go up more from
here?
>> So, in June, we're back to the 5-year
average already. Good. Um uh it's uh
yeah, towards the end of May, into June,
it it it started to drop again. But this
is where you get into the retail
component. You know, everybody says
retailers, they go they take their
prices up like a rocket and down like a
feather,
>> right? Um, and so, uh, retailers, uh,
will use this as an opportunity to see,
is there a new price floor that they're
happy with where maybe I'm going to
charge a consumer a little bit more than
I traditionally used to when these
markets are this cheap.
>> Um, because a customer is still going to
pay,
>> might not be 269 a tomato, but maybe
$1.99 a tomato when I used to be able
have to go to 149,
>> right? Um, if you think of grocery
retail economics has changed
significantly over the last 15 years.
Um,
>> say more about that. Yeah. Yeah. So, if
you think of like um how much home
delivery or click and collect like pick
up at the store um they're much more
advertising and marketing companies now
where they're they're selling customer
data to their suppliers about what are
customers actually purchasing or not.
>> Um all these things cost money for them
to stand up and run, right? And so I
think what you what you're seeing is
while grocery IBIDA is is about the
same. And they're all still that, you
know, traditionally was four to six. Now
you might see the the larger retailers
in that still maybe four to six, five to
seven range as margin.
>> As margin. Okay. Yep. At the end of the
day, when you take all their cost into
account, right?
>> It's they have a lot more expense on the
books in in ways that they didn't have
before because they're having to pay for
the additional labor and tech
infrastructure and warehouses to be able
to do the direct delivery, the more like
Amazon style approach that everybody is
used to of like I want something today
and I want it now. So just to be clear,
the margins are stable because on the
one side of the ledger, their costs have
gone up, build out all this tech, but on
the other side, they have data that they
can sell and that is monetizable and
they roughly even out and that's how you
get the stable margin.
>> Yep. And they're also charging you a
higher price as well, right? Like I
think some the consumer is definitely
paying for some of their want of being
able to get stuff more on demand. Right.
Right. As well as the variety that
they're expected to carry. grocery store
in the 70s, uh, a produce department was
probably 75 to 100 SKs. A grocery store
today is 300 to 500 SKs in their produce
department.
>> Um, so they're expected to carry this
high variety, all these unique things
that comes with more shrink
as well, right? So they had to balance
all of that. Um, so with those economic
changes for them, uh, I do see I do
think what we're seeing is that
retailers are tending to hold on to
prices longer than they traditionally
would,
>> uh, to try to help pay for for some of
this. And that's where, uh, you think of
beef is also one of the things
everybody's talking about, how crazy
beef prices are, and they are insane.
>> Um, I was at a a restaurant the other
weekend in in the city, and they had a
strip steak on the menu for like $120.
>> Oh my god. For a strip steak? I love a
shrimp stick. It's Yeah, but people are
still paying that which is crazy. Like
the the demand for beef is not slowing
down even though these prices are
getting so high.
>> But if you look at retail versus
wholesale um the cutout, the difference
between the retail price of beef and the
wholesale price of beef, um is it the
highest that it's ever been both in a
dollar perspective and a percent
perspective? So go back 20 years, the
the difference between the the price per
pound of beef at wholesale and retail
was probably 30%.
>> Uhhuh. Now it's it's probably closer to
40 45%.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. So So again, retailers are sort of
like building on this momentum, this
idea of like push this, you know, lack
of consumer knowledge of what the market
really is. And that's something we can't
play in the food service side of the
business. We're up like a rocket, down
like a rock because our our uh chefs um
and and some of the buying teams that
they have are are much more
knowledgeable about markets than than
the average consumer is.
>> Interesting. So, if they see high tomato
prices in the headlines, they're not
they're not going to be fooled thinking
that like, oh, it's going to go up even
further from here. They're like, all
right, the spike's done. Why are you
still charging me this amount?
>> They're going to log on to the USDA
website and look at prices. They're
going to be talking with some of our
farmers and growers about fuel
projections as well with some of them.
And so, um, yeah, it's a much more savvy
buyer than maybe the traditional, you
know, American retail consumer. It's
interesting to think that, you know, one
of the promises of the internet was
like, oh, the customer is gonna be able
to like be so well informed, right? And
they're going to know like they're going
to be able to find the best price. And
there probably is that to some extent,
right? That there probably are customers
who are like extremely well informed and
can find the best price. But the part
that they didn't talk about was that the
retailer would be very well informed
about the customer and that they would
be just as savvy and have all kinds of
counter tactics to counter the
customer's ability to learn about the
price,
>> right? And not to get all antitrust, but
if the customer has limited options for
buying tomatoes, it's not like you can
go into a supermarket armed with your
knowledge of the USDA website and start
negotiating.
>> Although that would be fun.
>> I I can't say I haven't tried that
before. Doesn't work. this.
>> Interesting. All right. [laughter]
>> I do complain to uh the the head produce
clerk at our store every once in a while
about the price of
>> I know the real I [laughter] know the
real price of this. Like come on guys.
>> Um what's the deal with disease in
tomatoes? Because I see that mentioned a
little bit um in relation to Mexico. And
my assumption nowadays is that basically
every major crop in the world is dealing
with like some sort of very troublesome
disease or pest or something like that.
Is it the same for tomatoes? Yeah, for
sure. And I think that that created some
I'd say preereeze impact in general on
the tomato industry where uh acreage and
production was was probably slightly
down overall, mostly in green houses. Um
they were dealing with a couple
different viruses that were sweeping
through um the more traditional
greenhouse varieties of mostly your
snacking tomatoes, right?
um that they were not used to and and
didn't really uh expect to have to deal
with and and those viruses were
decimating those those green houses
where they'd have to tear everything
out,
soil included, and just replant and
start everything from the beginning in
these green houses. So, um tomato
pricing, especially on more of the
snacking or high flavor variety things
that that you would see in a a grocery
store, um have been pretty volatile for
a while now because of this. Um they've
introduced some new varieties that are
are very promising and and have slowed
the the impact of this already.
>> Um but it's mother nature at the end of
the day, right? And like it's it's a
continually evolving mother nature that
that um
>> you're always going to be dealing with
something new as a grower. So, let's
talk about the quote tomato price
because there isn't actually a tomato
price because there isn't actually a
tomato and like we have one kind and
here is a box and I think there's a few
different types of tomatoes just within
this one box alone. So, I sort of have a
two-part question. The first part is how
correlated are tomato prices like
whether we're talking about like a New
Jersey beef steak tomato or one of these
like generally speaking is there a sort
of stable relationship between tomato
prices or do you see like the you know
the big fat red ones might be pricing in
a very different trajectory than say
these multicolor snacking tomatoes.
>> Yeah, they all interplay with each other
a little bit. I would say you do have
more complimentary or substitutable
tomatoes, right?
>> Um so if you think of like a round
tomato like your New Jersey beef steak
and and a Roma tomato,
>> those are pretty interchangeable. So um
in Florida, what happened was it was a
huge wipeout of
>> um rounds and so it created a lot of
pressure on the Roma market as well. And
so you saw that explode. Um and then
this one was so bad that anybody was
trying to get any tomato they could get.
So, you did see it start to affect some
of the more cherry uh tomatoes or or
viner ripe tomatoes that that you would
see out there. Um I'd say in general
there's some interplay. It all depends
on again supply and demand. If there's
not a ton of rounds to go around, then
Romas are going to get pushed up. If
there's not a ton of Romas to go around,
then everybody's going to switch into
the the high flavor stuff.
>> So, then speaking of the high flavor
stuff, so it's like, you know, I'm
addicted to them. My children really
like them. Um, do you see at the farm
level essentially a redistribution of
acreage towards the high value, high
margin stuff such that they're just not
as a percent or just whole like not
growing as much of like the frankly like
boring tomatoes period that like there
is just less because I have to imagine
the more margins higher price for some
of these that it's like well why are we
planting the the cheap normie tomatoes?
Yeah, I think cheap normie tomatoes are
>> when I was a kid, we didn't know about
that. We didn't know about these
tomatoes.
>> Yeah, exactly. And that's that's notion
of the tomato market as well is,
>> you know,
>> there's still a consumer for a basic
round tomato or vinripe tomato aroma,
right? Like, and there's a use for that.
>> Um, you're going to put that on a
sandwich or you're going to make a salsa
out of it or something like that, right?
Um, again, there's consumers that want
that basic tomato, maybe the more mild
flavor. um that's going to be a
guaranteed quality and and look a
certain way and always be the perfect
round shape that when they're in their
restaurant um or their production
facility, they're always going to get
the same yield out of it, right? Um
what's interesting to me on the consumer
side is definitely yeah, the explosion
of these flavored tomatoes. And I think
what you're seeing here is that um
growers that might have grown
traditionally cherry tomatoes or
um other [clears throat] type of tomato
varieties are replacing them with these
more sweeter varieties because they know
that customers like these
>> uh the snacking tomatoes in Vogue,
right? People will just eat these as a
snack versus only on a salad or
something like that. Um so what you're
seeing is probably more a replacement of
maybe some of the older varieties of
these that don't drive as much flavor
with the newer ones. Um
>> um earlier I went to look up tomato
prices on the terminal and I just
realized there's a there's a Japanese
bank.
>> There's a Japanese bank called Tomato. I
just learned that too.
>> And it has an amazing logo. I would I
would you would bank there if you lived
in Japan just just off the brand
identity. Um what's the correlation
between fresh tomato prices and canned
tomato prices? If fresh ones are going
up, would it be reasonable to assume
that the canned ones are going to go up
as well? Uh, no. They're completely
different markets, I would say.
Interesting. Yeah. So, a lot of your
canned production type tomatoes are
grown mostly in California. Um,
different varieties, different uh
subsets, different um
>> completely different growing regions for
the most part. They do grow some
processed stuff in in Florida as well,
but um
you you would see maybe some pressure on
that, but again, they're very different
supply chains and in production. So,
those are also longerterm contracts.
those uh producers put in place. Um so I
[clears throat] think you you see them
able to cost control maybe a little bit
tighter than than the the fresh industry
can.
>> Okay. So you talked about the weather is
being a major disruptor, but we know and
this is something that else comes up. We
know that another well there's actually
two things that we talk about a lot on
the podcast. One is the cardboard box
that this set of uh tomatoes are in. We
know um but then also freight costs and
the that actual truck and between diesel
and other things. We know that just
trucking is on a big up surge
particularly in like the last 6 months.
What do you see at Beldor on the sort of
pure logistics element and how much
would you say when I buy a case of
tomatoes am I paying for um you know the
the the shipping component or the
trucking component?
>> For sure. This wouldn't be a OddLots
podcast without talking about logistics,
right? Um
>> yeah, it's it's been rather extreme
lately obviously with with oil prices
going up. Um and tightening demand or
tightening availability within the
trucking industry as well.
>> Um if you think of um some of the
crackdown on immigration sort of like
truckers that are crossing the border
from Mexico and concerns there um we are
seeing the the supply of trucks shrink a
little bit as well. Yeah. Um those two
things together have caused prices to
explode where um a team drive so two
drivers on a truck so that you can
alternate so you can get it from the the
west coast to the east coast in the
shortest amount of time. So, a team
drive truck that we had run from
Selenus, California, the uh veg capital,
the salad bowl of of America, right?
Eight months ago might have been 101,000
for that.
>> Uh we we saw prices a couple weeks ago
as high as 16 $17,000. Uh which I I have
never seen.
>> Wow.
>> In my whole I grew up in this industry.
My my dad was a produce buyer. I I grew
up with him taking me out to fields and
meeting with growers and and seeing him
be able to build those relationships and
partnerships and that's what got me
interested in this industry was was
doing that with him. I I've never in my
whole career seen prices that high
before.
>> Wait, now I'm curious. Did you ever
think about going into farming directly?
>> No, you know, I I did work for a a
grower shipper for a couple years out of
college, L&M in North Carolina um uh to
get that experience on the grower side
and understand that. But um anytime my
dad would go and meet with a grower, he
was always talking about Kroger's
customer and what he needed for the
customer. Wasn't what he needed for him
as you know running this buying office
they had in Vero Beach, Florida that
bought all the produce for East Coast
and a lot of their imports.
>> He was a buyer for Kroger.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> Yep. So he he ran their produce buying
office that they had in in in Florida
that that uh managed all the the produce
buying for the East Coast. So, um, yeah,
he'd take me out of school when I was in
kindergarten on a Friday and we go to,
you know, really sexy, amazing places
like a Mockley, Florida, um, or Moltry,
Georgia to to go look at produce. Uh,
we'd stop and play around of golf or go
to a baseball game or or some type of on
the way to make it interesting. That
sounds really nice.
>> But, but I'd sit there and listen to him
and and everything was about the
customer to him, right? And so, like for
him, he won
>> if his customer won and if his grower
won, right? And part of what attracted
me to come to Balor last year was this
mindset that Bower had was the same
thing. Like for me, it's it's all about
making sure we can meet the need of our
customer wherever that is. Whether
that's a a commodity Roma heart um you
can get anywhere to a girl in duck
tomato like I brought here that's that's
unique to us and incredible flavor and
just an amazing story of Aaron and his
family and what they've done. you know,
to answer your question, I always wanted
to be able to, I don't know, build
something to bring value to the
customer, right? And and for me, that
was sort of following in his footsteps,
I guess, a little bit. Uh, in doing
this,
>> I want to ask about tomato strains, but
before I do, um, I need to ask about
something else we've been discussing on
the podcast, which is fertilizer prices.
So, if there's one thing I know about
tomatoes from growing them myself,
they're heavy feeders, right? like they
need a lot of biodegradable material off
of which to actually grow and feed.
Would you expect higher fertilizer costs
in the future to start feeding into the
retail price of tomatoes?
>> Yeah, absolutely. As you think about um
contracting cycles within tomatoes, you
know, retailers will be renegotiating
costs um throughout the year depending
on different growing regions, etc. Right
now, growers have been able to u mostly
pre-bought, right? Especially the bigger
ones. Um so, their fertilizer cost is is
pretty locked in at this point. But what
you're going to see over the next six
months um is is that's going to start to
evaporate. So, um at Baldor, our big
contracting season is coming up towards
the end of the summer where we we we try
to lock with a lot of our growers to
make sure we can get consistency in
supply for our customers. Our growers
are already talking about the cost of
fertilizer with us. Yeah.
>> And saying we've got you covered now,
but come contracting for next year. This
is something we definitely have to talk
about. So, I do expect it to um affect
that price. But then it comes down to
how much is are we willing to take
versus how much do we does a retailer
have to pass on to a consumer. Right.
>> So, you mentioned that this box of
tomatoes we have in front of us is a
company called Girl and Doug, which I
hadn't heard of.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and you said they have an incredible
story. I'm on their website right now
and I'm already learning about a bunch
of tomato. Are they varietals?
Varieties. Varieties. There's a baby
Yoda tomato. Do you know that?
>> Well, this is part of the fun of buying
your seeds every year.
>> A cider pop tomato, a Firebird tomato, a
I knew about the sunold, an atomic
tomato. Um, when you say, okay, they
have this amazing story. Like how does a
company become like they break through
in the tomato market and like such that
they're like you know they someone might
go to their website like what is that
story and like how do they have all
these like new exciting varietals? When
did this become a thing?
>> Probably over the last like 15 years or
so you've seen a big explosion in in the
stacking tomato category. A lot of that
was driven by uh greenhouse production.
>> Oh, okay.
>> Right. So, uh, the ability to grow
perfectly indoors with the exact right,
uh, temperature, humidity, water
control. Um, I'm sure Tracy with your
your home beds, you would love to have
that, right?
>> I Oh my god, if I could get an
irrigation system going, that would be a
game changer, but I won't. So,
>> it it allows these growers to grow seed
varieties um that might be a little bit
more challenging outdoors.
>> Ah,
>> right. And if you think of especially
Aaron and and girl and Doug, these
varieties that they have in here, these
are highly susceptible to disease. Now,
he grows still outdoors shade house uh
and a little bit of greenhouse, but um
they're unique. They take a little extra
TLC, I would say, than a traditional,
you know, round tomato. with the
explosion of greenhouse production which
really started in in Holland over there
they're they're probably 15 20 years
ahead of us they were growing some of
these really cool unique varieties over
there the seed companies over there are
very innovative and what you saw was uh
US companies understanding this snacking
tomato or Canadian companies really
understanding the snacking tomato
category was a big opportunity started
partnering with a lot of these seed
companies over there to try all new
things
>> but how did these new varieties because
there are so many different tomato
varieties right and A lot of them have
very amusing names like cream sausage or
striped tiger or whatever or baby Yoda.
Like how do they actually enter I guess
like the customers consciousness such
that restaurants or supermarkets are
asking for these particular varieties or
such that you're convincing them that
this is what they need?
>> Yeah, I'd say it's almost the other way
around. Okay. I would say that it's
really the restaurants and then the
retailers that are that are pushing the
demand towards the consumer of what they
want to buy. I I really do think a lot
of it starts with restaurants and if you
see something specific on a menu in a
restaurant and you try it, you're like,
"Oh my gosh, I want to try this at home,
>> right?" [clears throat] And so like we
view that very much as our wheelhouse at
Bowdor is our ability to go and find
things like this that you'll want to
call this a girl in Doug tomato medley
on the menu because you know something
unique that not a lot of your
competitors are going to have and it's
this cool story that if a customer asks
that hopefully you've you've talked to
your your weight staff and they can
educate the consumer a little bit about
the story of of of a girl in Doug,
right? I think it's less about what the
consumer thinks they want or that
they've heard about this type of thing.
I think it's more they've seen it
somewhere um and and tried it. And then
a lot of these bigger tomato companies,
Sunset Masterardi Produce is a big
partner of ours. Um you know, they're
one of the most innovative when it comes
to seed varieties. They have acres of
testing green houses where they're
they're consistently testing new
varieties to see what will be a good mix
of flavor and yield and something that's
unique or colored differently um that
they think would be a hit with consumers
and then they're launching it. And just
like anything, it comes down to
marketing and advertising and getting it
in the customer's hand uh to be able to
drive that demand.
>> So, um I've been to one of these uh
multi-acre multi-acre indoor tomato
green houses in Lamington, Ontario, and
I was there on a very sort of like
chilly, drizzly October day.
>> Um and inside the greenhouse, it felt
like the most beautiful spring day, like
the dream spring day. And so like it was
amazing, but all I could think about was
like this must just cost a fortune in
electricity cost to maintain this
incredible climate. And the light was so
beautiful obviously and it's because I
believe they have a natural gas pipeline
that like feeds a lot of this from the
US goes under the Great Lakes or
whatever or through and then powers
this. What about like like if we're
talking about greenhouse grown tomatoes
and the recreation of a beautiful spring
day, how much is it like variability in
electricity cost or energy costs are
going to go into that tomato?
>> Yeah, I mean it all plays a factor,
right, Joe? And I think um I with these
green houses, energy is a huge
component, but I I would say still just
as much it's the fertilizer and it's the
labor and the the production costs as
well. In general, if you think of like
tomato markets now, right, that were so
high, the growers were not the ones
making a killing, right? If you think
about they lost 80% of their crop.
>> Yeah.
>> Um they're selling a tomato for 100
bucks a case. Like there, this is a
razor thin margin business for our
farmers
where, you know, you're going to have
great years and you're going to have bad
years. And a lot of it comes down to
your input cost. And then what's the,
you know, USDA going rate for tomato
based on supply and demand. Um, and so,
you know, it right now is a tough time
for these guys because these input cost
pressures are so high and there's a lot
of pressure from our side to try to keep
cost down as much as possible, right?
It's that yin and yang between um a a
customer and a a supplier of, you know,
I want to try to keep my cost as
competitive as possible. They still need
to make a good return. Uh, we've got to
figure out how to how to do that equally
uh with each other. So given razor thin
margins for, you know, places like
restaurants, I assume that if they're
serving a salad that is mostly tomatoes,
I'm going to go back to the capray salad
um example, although I guess there's
mozzar mozzarella or which cheese do you
use for capray?
>> Buffalo.
>> Buffalo. Yeah. Um so I guess that's
probably going up as well. Anyway, if
the prime component of a particular dish
is is spiking basically and we seem to
be experiencing more spikes overall in
recent years, right? We have beef, we
have eggs, you mentioned romaine
lettuce, um avocados potentially.
>> How are restaurants actually managing
their menu prices? Cuz I assume they
need to know like if they come up with a
dish, they're going to be able to sell
it for a reasonable margin in the
future. But then if you have such
volatility in ingredient prices that
seems really really difficult to
predict.
>> Oh absolutely it is. But I think if you
take a step back on the restaurant side
the cost of food is about 30% of their
overall cost. Right? You go back to our
retail example a retailer 75% of their
cost 70 to 75% of their cost is the cost
of the actual food.
>> Right? So, um, if you think of, let's
take a burger in New York 2019, it was
probably 14 15 bucks on the menu. Today,
a good burger on the menu is is 22 or
$23. If you look at the actual food cost
of that burger, it's probably gone from
maybe 350 to 550. That's that's a $2
increase. That's huge. That's
substantial, right? Like food costs are
definitely up significantly, but that's
not the full 14 to to 22 to 23. We don't
talk about it enough, but the other
input costs of running a restaurant are
up significantly as well. Whether it's
labor, rent, uh utilities, that type of
stuff as well. Like those pressures,
you're seeing just as much on the cost
of of the food in a restaurant are
pushing their pricing up as much as food
is, right? And so, um, yeah, for a chef,
like their their goal is to be as
consistent in their food cost as
possible. I think that's why a lot of
them tend to have that like I want you
to price me daily or weekly and I want
to shop you around and I don't want to
commit to volume with you type of uh
aspect that we have from some partners.
Others go the other way where they want
to be able to partner but you have this
sort of like dichotomy in the industry
of you know different ways of viewing
how they they keep their food costs
honest right with their distributor.
>> This makes a lot of sense to me. So the
restaurant is fine with very highly
variable pricing or doesn't simply
because or they'll take that risk of not
locking in simply because so much of
their costs are ex are not the food
component. And so they're the whereas
for the grocery store or some other
retailer, they're the ones because their
end price is so correlated to the
underlying price, they would be the ones
that would care more about longer
duration and locking that in.
>> For sure. And in a restaurant, they want
to keep their food cost as low as
possible.
>> Sure.
>> Like their goal is to keep it as
absolutely low as possible. So the most
most chefs want to continue to shop
around and not make some of those
commitments. And in case the market
drops out, what you know,
>> the tomatoes, you know, were super high
in in April, May, and they're coming
down in June. But you go back to
November, December, they were 20, 30%
below the 5-year average, right? And so
like, do I want to lock to get some
guarantee of price? You know, my old
days when I was at HelloFresh before
coming to Bowdor, a meal kit delivery
company, we had a a cost per meal that
we had to hit. I wanted consistency in
pricing. I was trying to lock as long as
possible. For a lot of chefs, I think
some of them want to be able to play
that variability and up and down.
>> Um, so that they can take advantage of
of some of the cheaper opportunities to
keep their food cost lower so they can
ek out a couple more dollars here and
there.
>> Um, and they probably think they net out
at the end in in a net win. Um, but in
general, yeah, like
food cost is is a good component of of
of a restaurant, but there's a lot more
that goes into that versus like a a
retailer, a food service distributor,
most of our cost is the cost of the
food. So, when that cost changes,
>> um it's it's near-term much more
impactful on us for sure. But that's our
job as Bowdor is to help direct our our
customer, right? right? Like we want to
make sure they know where markets are
heading and and what we're able to do to
help support them the best that we
possibly can with, you know, we carry 80
different u tomato skews at a given
time, right? Right. So, we want to help
push you towards the things that are
>> um the best for you or or if you're
looking for price that that's the best
optimal price. But it's also my job to
source
>> uh multiple regions and find the right
partners and ones that you know when
tomato markets get get costly um that
they're not just going to pull act of
God on us and raise the raise the price
significantly that I can still get my
contract at a good
>> uh value, but that I'm also there for
them when the markets are super cheap
that I'm pumping the volume through them
and and supporting them. Right? It's
this give and take relationship. We both
have to win. You know, um negotiations
in joint partnerships really are
win-win. Um and that's really what my my
team's job is is to find a way to make
sure things are a win-win and we're
providing as much value for our end
customer as possible
>> by making sure that our our suppliers
are well taken care of as well.
>> Okay. Well, speaking of direction,
>> what's your favorite tomato variety?
What should we be checking out this
summer?
>> Let's say price is irrelevant.
>> Price is irrelevant. Yeah, I think when
tomato prices are are high, any of these
prices are high, what I would tell any
average retail consumer is like go
outside your comfort zone.
>> There's so much good varietal produce
out there, whether it's in your local
farmers market or even in your grocery
store. Now, um I'd say mass availability
if you're looking for something in the
store. Uh Sunset Masterardi flavor
bombs,
>> incredible. They they've got a line of
bombs. They're they're four or five
different varieties that they
>> the ones that come in like little
packets. They're flat little clamshells
almost like these berries are, right?
>> Um and usually still on the vine.
>> Those are incredible. And some of the
top restaurants in New York are using
them for like pasta sauce and different
things like that. Um it is a main
ingredient because the flavor profile on
those is just so perfect.
>> I'd say for our restaurant consumer or
somebody that's not in retail, it's
these Girl and Doug tomatoes that I
brought for you guys. These these
varieties that they have in this medley
are um 100% grown for flavor. Uh,
>> they're really good. We've been We were
eating some of them before we started
recording and we can attest they're
delicious.
>> So, Aaron, his his uh parents had a a
floral shop. They retired, bought a
produce farm of all things and and he
sort of took it over after a while and
started growing some of the craziest
cool varieties of anything. Uh, whether
it was micro greens to tomatoes to
whatever to sell to chefs. So, he's a
very like chef focused um uh grower,
right? And so, uh, he started with like
building some relationships with chefs
directly in the in in the city and
literally FedExing from San Diego
>> here. Some of those chefs helped connect
him with Bowd so that we could get them
through our distribution where this
might last a little bit better than
through FedEx, right? Um, but these
tomatoes that he uh has in the box here,
these varieties, uh, again, they're
they're specifically bred for flavor.
They're a little bit more susceptible to
disease, etc. because of that. But to
make sure he gets the flavor in them,
he'll go through and call out at least a
third of the flowers. Wow.
>> When they start to produce to make sure
that the right nutrients get into each
individual tomato to make sure that the
flavor is there when it gets to the end
consumer.
>> Yeah. What is the actual process of like
you know what we want an even sweeter
tomato? So it's like okay some or some
some new dimension flavor. Is that
happening by the shift in nutrient
delivery? Is it happening through some
genetic engineering? Did it happen
through some sort of like grafting? like
where in the sort of like the R& the R&D
of tomato is it happening where these
new flavors are coming from.
>> Yeah. So it's it's almost all
crossbreeding, right? And it's it's done
at the the mostly at the seed company
level. So a lot of these growers will
partner with specific seed companies
where they find good relationships or
that they grow, you know, they're
developing seeds in in a way that makes
u sense to them and their business model
and the type of flavor that they're
looking for, right? And so, um, a lot of
these guys will work specifically with
them and and test different seed
varieties and give them feedback to the
seed company to be able to, you know,
well, this didn't have as much yield as
we hoped it would or the flavor on this
was not sweet enough or there's too much
acid in this, right? And so then the
seed company will go back and do some
more crossbreeding and try a new variety
that they'll put out there, right? And
then when they find the ones that they
love, they're going to go and and and
get a contract and um get the seed in
and start growing. So, it's it's a
multi-year process. It's it's actually
pretty fascinating. If you go to um
again, Sunset, Paul and that team there,
if you if you go to their their R&D
facility where they're growing hundreds
of different varieties at a time, it's
it's really fascinating to go through
and see some of the cool stuff that
they're doing. Um tomatoes that are like
completely black to, you know, um all
the different striping like on the
Firebird that Aaron has here, right?
Like they're unique. Tomatoes are
beautiful like bumblebees are
>> social media and Instagram specifically
must have played a significant role in
the last 1015 years of the tomato market
right like
>> I think in food in general right like
food trends pop from social media now
>> whether it was I don't know that pink
sauce stuff years ago to um yeah
snacking tomatoes right like influencers
do
>> what was the pink sauce
>> it was like a recipe that went viral it
was basically a tomato sauce with like
lots of cream in it or something I I
can't remember what made it pink. I did
try it. It was during like COVID times,
I think.
>> Yeah, I remember that one.
>> But yeah, I we're constantly looking at
what food trends are um on social media
as well, like for us to be relevant for
our chefs to make sure that we can meet
them with
>> what a consumer might be looking for
when they come into their restaurant for
either special or or something always on
the menu.
>> So, you brought us some strawberries as
well, which is actually something that I
am also planning on planting in my new
raised beds. I used to have some in my
old ones and there is nothing like a
fresh like farm grown strawberry versus
what you buy
>> at a mediocre supermarket. Why do they
taste so much better than like what I
would get at no shade to Walmart but at
Walmart
>> at pretty much any other retailer as
well. So
>> yeah, I think it comes down to seed
genetics, right? So um strawberries are
extremely challenging to grow and
they're extremely perishable, right? The
skin is super soft. Um, you have to hand
place them in every um till that that
you produce.
>> And also, they taste so good that
literally every other creature on earth
wants to eat them. whether it's like
birds or slugs or deer or rabbits or
whatever
>> or maybe your dog as well
>> or my dog. Yeah.
>> In the in the 60s and 70s and and
continued through to today, the domestic
supply chain of strawberries, a lot of
the seed varieties were coming from uh
partnerships with universities. So like
UC Davis, University of Florida for
Florida grown berries um where uh
customers love berries. So everybody
wants berries all the time, year round.
They didn't want it to be a seasonal
thing anymore.
>> To do that, you had to grow varieties
that were a little bit more firmer,
could take the ride on a truck from
California to New York for 5 days um and
and survive, right? Uh and so yeah, a
lot of the varieties that you see in
your, you know, traditional shipper
label products are these these varieties
that are in partnership with with
universities where a lot of it was
functional, not flavorful.
>> I just have one uh last question. We've
gone this whole uh conversation without
bringing up the phrase cold chain. And
oh yeah,
>> um you mentioned Hunt's Point and I'm
just curious this we we did an episode
on this a few years ago.
>> Is the New York City market distinctly
operationally difficult to get from, you
know, farm to store in a way that's
different from other markets due to the
sort of the the geograph the geographic
reality of New York City? Yeah, I'd say
it's definitely a lot more expensive.
Nobody wants to take a truck across the
George Washington Bridge to to the
Bronx, right? So, um you know that I've
I've worked at,
>> you know, major retailers that are
national. I've worked at a meal delivery
company where we had to ship product
through the mail in FedEx or UPS for one
or two days. Uh, and now I've worked in
one of the most competitive food service
markets uh,
in the world with with New York City and
in uh, uh, Boston DC, Philly where we
service as well. Um, it's challenging
everywhere, Joe. Like it's a game of
perfection, right? And and a lot of it
is u um, having to keep, you know, this
berry ideally
>> would be at a perfect 33 to 34 degrees
from the minute it's put on a truck to
the minute that it's served on a
customer's plate. Like that's really the
ideal temperature to to keep this berry
absolutely perfect, especially something
like a Swedish batch that I have here.
That is a more flavorful variety that's
going to go bad faster than maybe
something more traditional. Right. This
tomato
um ideally you're sitting between 48 to
52 degrees for like perfection. I've got
to ride both of these on the same truck
to a customer.
>> How do I get that done? Right? So like
this is a constant challenge that we
have um as an industry is is making sure
you maintain that that cold supply chain
that I need, you know, 32 to 34 for
this. I need, you know, 32 to 34 for my
protein and my dairy, but I need 48 to
50 for a tomato or an onion, right?
>> All right, Jacob, that was amazing.
>> We had a lot of fun talking about
tomatoes and also the food distribution
business. Um, thank you so much for
coming on all Thoughts.
>> Yeah, thank you guys. And thank you for
the tomatoes and the strawberries.
>> Enjoy.
>> So that was fascinating. And we have all
this fresh produce that we now get to
eat. Um, a couple things stood out for
me. So one, the idea of um, I guess
theformationally
advantaged, you know, chef or restaurant
buyer versus theformationally
disadvantaged retail customer. And the
idea that like supermarkets can push
through additional price increases if
this goes back to the conversation we
had with that baker in Chicago a while
ago. If all the retail consumer is
seeing in the headlines is like tomato
prices are high, tomato prices are high,
>> customers are going to accept higher
tomato prices.
>> Yeah. This idea that the end retailer
can actually push price and then not
take it down. It's not just some myth,
right? It's not just sort of like that
is like a real phenomenon observed in
the industry. And of course, in theory,
some uh tomato customers could do the
homework and like find out, but like no,
no one has time for that. No, but like
no one's going to have time to do that
and actually like price comparison shop.
Like, yes, of course, the information is
all theoretically out there, but the
restaurant does that professionally. I
don't have time to do that. And of
course they're going to have like an
edge over me in terms of like yeah like
I just I have other things to do.
>> Just just outsource it by going to eat
at the restaurant exclusively. Just
don't go to the grocery store.
>> That's right.
>> You'll you'll save on input costs, not
on labor costs, though.
>> No, but that was a great conversation.
I'm just fascinated by like also the
sheer explosion of varieties and just
the fact that again like the idea of
like a mass consumer base of snacking
tomato eaters that's like a fairly novel
thing like a lot of like my kids like
really like snacking on tomatoes I don't
think like when I was a kid I'm sure
that market of like children let alone
adults who like thought about like these
are the good tomato it's like I never
heard it was just when I was a kid there
was add tomato and it was just red thing
that was like the size of your fist. And
that is obviously like a change in the
fundamental tomato market that is
relatively novel.
>> I never thought about it, but I don't
remember eating tiny tomatoes when I was
a kid either. So, yeah, it must be new.
But, you know, also like your question
about Instagram and that impact on food,
like I think that is definitely a part
of it. And
>> the color Yeah, like the idea of a black
tomato that would be cool to take a
picture of. One of my favorite tomato
varieties is called Ethiopian black, but
they're not even actually black. So, I
don't know. Very I think they're
actually from Ukraine. Um,
>> Ethiopian black tomatoes from Ukraine.
>> They're kind of like strip they're
darker and striped, but you can get like
indigo tomatoes that are actually Okay,
we should stop here cuz we're just going
to start talking about tomato varieties.
Shall we leave it there?
>> Those are nice looking tomatoes.
>> Yeah, they're really You'll get some
hopefully if my tomatoes survive um the
next week of colder weather. Anyway,
shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our producers,
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Armano
Bennett atbot, Kale Brooks at
Kalebrooks, and Kevin Lozano at Kevin
Lloyd Lozano.
>> And for more OddLots content, you can
check out our daily newsletter. You can
find that at bloomberg.com/odotss.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
247 in our Discord, discord.gg/odlot.
gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video, or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.